Low-latency HLS Streaming (#1)
video-dev/hlsjs-rfcs: proposals/0001-lhls.md

- If the prefetch segment was advertised with a metadata tag, the transformed segment must be advertised with an identical or equivalent metadata tag. For example:
    - `EXT-X-PREFETCH-DISCONTINUITY` must be transformed to `EXT-X-DISCONTINUITY`
- When a prefetch segment is transformed to a complete segment, the server must not increment the `EXT-X-MEDIA-SEQUENCE` value. 
- When a prefetch discontinuity is transformed to complete discontinuity, the server must not increment the `EXT-X-DISCONTINUITY-SEQUENCE` value.

The server may advertise zero or more complete segments.

## Example Playlists

The example below is a Media Playlist listing two available segments and two prefetch segments.

`URL: https://foo.com/bar.m3u8`
```
#EXTM3U
#EXT-X-VERSION:3
#EXT-X-TARGETDURATION:2
#EXT-X-PROGRAM-DATE-TIME:2018-09-05T20:59:06.531Z
#EXTINF:2.000
https://foo.com/bar/0.ts
#EXT-X-PROGRAM-DATE-TIME:2018-09-05T20:59:08.531Z
#EXTINF:2.000
https://foo.com/bar/1.ts

#EXT-X-PREFETCH:https://foo.com/bar/2.ts
#EXT-X-PREFETCH:https://foo.com/bar/3.ts
```
The next manifest request may return: 

```
#EXTM3U
#EXT-X-VERSION:3
#EXT-X-TARGETDURATION:2

> #EXT-X-PROGRAM-DATE-TIME:2018-09-05T20:59:06.531Z

Reviewer: timestamps need to be shifted

Author: Thanks!

- Feature Name: Low-Latency Streaming
- Start Date: 2018-08-18
- RFC PR: https://github.com/video-dev/hlsjs-rfcs/pull/1
- Hls.js Issue: (leave this empty)
- Authors: John Bartos, Tom Boshoven
- Signatories: JW Player, (your name here!)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

> Low-latency streaming is becoming an increasingly desired feature for live events, and is typically defined as a delay of two seconds or less from point of capture to playback (glass-to-glass). However, the current HLS specification precludes this possibility - within the HLS guidelines, the best attempts have achieved about four seconds glass-to-glass, with average implementations typically beyond thirty seconds. This RFC proposes modifications to the HLS specification ("HTTP Live Streaming 2nd Edition" specification (IETF RFC 8216, draft 03)") which aim to reduce the glass-to-glass latency of a live HLS stream to two seconds or below. The scope of these changes are centered around a new "prefetch" segment; it's advertising, delivery, and interpretation within the client.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Low-latency streaming is becoming an increasingly desired feature for live events, and is typically defined as a delay of two seconds or less from point of capture to playback (glass-to-glass). However, the current HLS specification precludes this possibility - within the HLS guidelines, the best attempts have achieved about four seconds glass-to-glass, while average implementations have delays of over thirty seconds. This RFC proposes modifications to the HLS specification ("HTTP Live Streaming 2nd Edition" specification (IETF RFC 8216, draft 03)") which aim to reduce the glass-to-glass latency of a live HLS stream to two seconds or below. The scope of these changes are centered around a new "prefetch" segment; its advertising, delivery, and interpretation within the client.
```

> Low-latency streaming is becoming an increasingly desired feature for live events, and is typically defined as a delay of two seconds or less from point of capture to playback (glass-to-glass). However, the current HLS specification precludes this possibility - within the HLS guidelines, the best attempts have achieved about four seconds glass-to-glass, with average implementations typically beyond thirty seconds. This RFC proposes modifications to the HLS specification ("HTTP Live Streaming 2nd Edition" specification (IETF RFC 8216, draft 03)") which aim to reduce the glass-to-glass latency of a live HLS stream to two seconds or below. The scope of these changes are centered around a new "prefetch" segment; it's advertising, delivery, and interpretation within the client.

Reviewer 3: This is kind of a moot point because I think 2 seconds is a good goal for this project, but 2 seconds is probably the most aggressive definition of "low latency" I've seen. [Wowza](https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5955fc221b631b7dd41ede60/t/5ab4cc930e2e72bd834f7a46/1521798310775/Ultra_Low_Latency_Streaming_for_When_Every_Second_Counts_Wowza.png) pegs it at 1-5s and @wilaw [has it at 4-10s](https://www.twitch.tv/demuxed/clip/TastyJoyousPonyPRChase), with 2 seconds being closer to "Ultra low latency". Not sure what I expect you to do with that info but thought it was worth pointing out in case there's opportunity for industry consistency.

Reviewer 4: Agreed. I've been working with Will on the new latency ranges definition that you have seen in his Demuxed presentation. We defined low latency by what you can achieve with 1s and 2s segments of regular HLS/DASH (meaning : 4 to 10 seconds latency) and ultra low latency as what you can achieve with chunked CMAF (meaning : between 1 and 4 seconds). We used this technology criteria as the previous latency ranges definition by Wowza & Streaming Media was mixing technology and use case requirements criterias.
![latency_ranges-v3](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/38870794/51024086-df717100-1588-11e9-8d3b-eab88837a83f.png)

So we maybe should say here: 'Low-latency and Ultra low-latency streaming are becoming  increasingly desired features for live events, and are typically defined as a delay of 4 to 10 seconds for low latency and 1 to 4 seconds for ultra low latency, from point of capture to playback (glass-to-glass)'

Author: Yeah agreed. Thanks for keeping me up to date with Will's work - I want to be aligned with whatever he's doing where possible. Has he been factoring the Streamline project into his definitions? The LHLS fork of Exoplayer is getting 1.1s latency which is pretty crazy. 

>'Low-latency and Ultra low-latency streaming are becoming increasingly desired features for live events, and are typically defined as a delay of 4 to 10 seconds for low latency and 1 to 4 seconds for ultra low latency, from point of capture to playback (glass-to-glass)'

Sounds good to me!

As of writing this, Hls.js by default will have between 1 and 2 segment's duration of client-side latency. The plan is to start the stream at the last complete segment, and begin buffering prefetch from there. I'm not sure what server-side latency is looking like but it should put us at the lower end of the "Low latency" definition.

Author: >We defined low latency by what you can achieve with 1s and 2s segments of regular HLS/DASH (meaning : 4 to 10 seconds latency) and ultra low latency as what you can achieve with chunked CMAF (meaning : between 1 and 4 seconds). 

So by this definition we're building an ultra low latency player.

Reviewer 4: By default yes, but the player configuration shall allow a higher target latency. Which leads me to another close consideration : in DASH we are heading towards setting the target latency on the manifest level, and not on the player configuration level. Would it be interesting for LHLS to discuss a similar approach, like #EXT-X-TARGETLATENCY: 2500 (if we measure in milliseconds) ?

Reviewer 5: @nicoweilelemental That's an interesting idea!!! There are lot of advantages in being able to configure the playout latency at the manifest itself. If we going ahead with this, I propose a small modification though. Instead of setting a target latency, I suggest we set a target buffer size. Since the encoder's latency is not in player's control this definition could be little-bit misleading. Instead we could ask the player to maintain a specific target buffer size with the condition that it continuously loads data to be as close to the live edge as possible. Something like #EXT-X-TARGETBUFFERSIZE: 2500 .

Reviewer 4: You're right @jkarthic-akamai it's hard for the player to determine what's the actual E2E latency. The only way would be to make at least one #EXT-X-PROGRAM-DATE-TIME insertion mandatory per child playlist. In dash we recommend putting the Producer Reference Time in the prft mp4 box, which the player can parse to get the actual timecode of a segment: it could replace #EXT-X-PROGRAM-DATE-TIME for latency measurement.
Setting the #EXT-X-TARGETBUFFERSIZE instead will roughly fill the same purpose while relaxing the dependency to absolute time.

### Principles

1. Accessible

An accessible solution is one which will actually be implemented. This proposal strives to be easily implementable, both client and server-side, by leveraging as much existing technology as possible. Any new code is kept to a minimum and follows established HLS patterns.

2. Scalable

A scalable solution must be able to deliver low-latency video at the existing scale of HLS. Scale here does not just mean viewer numbers, but also the breadth of use cases. The client must be empowered to play low-latency streams while supporting as many uses of HLS as possible (e.g. SSAI); and the server must be able to deliver an LHLS in a cost-effective manner.

3. Good Enough

A pragmatic solution is as good as it needs to be, but balances performance with the above considerations. A solution which achieves two seconds of latency with broad support is twice as good as a solution which achieves 1 second with few adopters.

# Guide-Level Explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

> Low-latency streaming is used by Hls.js to stream HLS segments which have not completed transcoding yet. Segments do not need to be complete to be buffered - each segment contains a number of GOPs (group of pictures), and each GOP can be independently transmuxed and appended to a Media Source Extensions (MSE) source buffer in the playback user agent. Using HTTP chunked transfer encoding, Hls.js is able to maintain a persistent connection with a transcoding server; the server, in turn, is able to push partial segments to the client before completion. Additional reductions in latency are possible by negotiating the TCP connection ahead of time the segment needs to be buffered.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Low-latency streaming is used by Hls.js to stream HLS segments which have not completed transcoding yet. Segments do not need to be complete to be buffered - each segment contains a number of GOPs (group of pictures), and each GOP can be independently transmuxed and appended to a Media Source Extensions (MSE) source buffer in the playback user agent. Using HTTP chunked transfer encoding, Hls.js is able to maintain a persistent connection with a transcoding server; the server, in turn, is able to push partial segments to the client before completion. Additional reductions in latency are possible by negotiating the TCP connection before the segment needs to be buffered.
```

> Hls.js takes advantage of this feature when it detections a custom Media Segment tag within a playlist. When Hls.js sees this tag, it initiates a connection to the segment endpoint using the Fetch API with streaming body responses. Each time Hls.js receives a chunk of data, it passes it through it's transmuxing pipeline so that it may be buffered. Any samples which cannot be decoded using the information in the present chunk are saved so that they may be used in the next. In this way Hls.js is able to stream segments through it's pipeline instead of waiting for the whole segment to be available first.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Hls.js takes advantage of this feature when it detects a custom Media Segment tag within a playlist. When Hls.js sees this tag, it initiates a connection to the segment endpoint using the Fetch API with streaming body responses. Each time Hls.js receives a chunk of data, it passes it through its transmuxing pipeline so that it may be buffered. Any samples which cannot be decoded using the information in the present chunk are saved so that they may be used in the next. In this way Hls.js is able to stream segments through it's pipeline instead of waiting for the whole segment to be available first.
```

Author: Thanks for the edits!

> The structure of a low-latency playlist ensures backwards compatibility not only with older versions of Hls.js, but also with clients which do not support this proposal. Low-latency segments are advertised with custom tags which, according to the HLS spec, must be ignored by clients. And in addition to low-latency segments an LHLS playlist also advertises complete segments. It is this feature which allows servers to deliver a single manifest which supported by all clients; and provides supporting clients the option to disable low-latency streaming at-will.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The structure of a low-latency playlist ensures backwards compatibility not only with older versions of Hls.js, but also with clients which do not support this proposal. Low-latency segments are advertised with custom tags which, according to the HLS spec, must be ignored by clients. And in addition to low-latency segments, an LHLS playlist also advertises complete segments. It is this feature that allows servers to deliver a single manifest which is supported by all clients and provides supporting clients with the option to disable low-latency streaming at-will.
```

- A segment must remain available to clients for a period of time equal to the duration of the segment plus the duration of the longest Playlist file distributed by the server containing that segment.

### Sequence Numbers
[sequence-numbers]: #sequence-numbers

A prefetch segment's Discontinuity Sequence Number is the value of the `EXT-X-DISCONTINUITY-SEQUENCE` tag (or zero if none) plus the number of `EXT-X-DISCONTINUITY` and `EXT-X-PREFETCH-DISCONTINUITY` tags in the Playlist preceding the URI line of the segment.

If a prefetch segment is the first segment in a manifest, its Media Sequence Number is either 0, or declared in the Playlist. The Media Sequence Number of every other prefetch segment is equal to the Media Sequence Number of the complete segment or prefetch segment that precedes it plus one.

### Playlist Duration

The duration of a Media Playlist containing prefetch segments is considered to be equal to the duration of all complete segments plus the expected duration of all prefetch segments.

## Media Segment Tags

> The server must not precede any prefetch segment with metadata other than those specified in this document, with the specified constraints.

Reviewer 2: I think this constraint breaks extensibility. Since you explicitly list the `#ext-x-` tags that are not allowed in this section, this statement can be considered redundant.

### EXTINF

A prefetch segment must not be advertised with an `EXTINF` tag. The duration of a prefetch segment must be equal to or less than what is specified by the `EXT-X-TARGETDURATION` tag. 

### EXT-X-DISCONTINUITY
[discontinuities]: #ext-x-discontinuity

A prefetch segment must not be advertised with an `EXT-X-DISCONTINUITY` tag. To insert a discontinuity just for prefetch segments, the server must insert the `EXT-X-PREFETCH-DISCONTINUITY` tag before the newest `EXT-X-PREFETCH` tag of the new discontinuous range. 

> 

Reviewer 6: In our use case, discontinuities are caused by a gap in timestamps in the stream sent by the broadcaster (because of a networking issue or a camera flip for instance). This means that we do not know if there is a discontinuity at the time we advertise the prefetch segment. We only know of the discontinuity at the point when we write the first data into the prefetch segment. 

This means that we would add a EXT-X-PREFETCH-DISCONTINUITY tag to a prefetch segment after it has first been advertised, and that a player may not see the EXT-X-PREFETCH-DISCONTINUITY tag by the time it starts playing back media from that prefetch segment.

This behavior doesn't seem to be explicitly forbidden by the spec, but it does require the player to have some heuristic to detect discontinuities that were not advertised in time.

Author: >This means that we would add a EXT-X-PREFETCH-DISCONTINUITY tag to a prefetch segment after it has first been advertised, and that a player may not see the EXT-X-PREFETCH-DISCONTINUITY tag by the time it starts playing back media from that prefetch segment.

I can foresee this being a problem if there is a large gap between the PTS values. Hls.js feeds a discontinuity tag into the muxer so that it can modify PTS values post-discontinuity to ensure that there is no gap. Without the tag we'd be inserting a gap into the sourceBuffer equal to to the PTS gap in seconds. Depending on how much forward buffer exists we can jump it without a stall, but we'd still need to do a seek in userland which would cause a momentary disruption.

Reviewer 6: How would you imagine the interaction between EXT-X-GAP and prefetch segments should work? Should it be allowed to add EXT-X-GAP to an already advertised prefetch segment? That would be another way to address the use case above I believe.

Author: >This behavior doesn't seem to be explicitly forbidden by the spec

I'll add language which addresses this case. It doesn't make sense to add it as a prefetch discontinuity after the fact, but it must appear when transformed to a complete segment. Players should be able to handle gaps so I don't believe that this a problem.

Maybe the prefetch discontinuity isn't even needed anymore - I need to think a bit harder about SSAI workflows. You can probably just stop adding prefetch segments and then insert a regular discontinuity before the ads.

Author: >How would you imagine the interaction between EXT-X-GAP and prefetch segments should work? Should it be allowed to add EXT-X-GAP to an already advertised prefetch segment? That would be another way to address the use case above I believe.

I suppose a gap would a) cause the client to ignore the segment or b) abort the connection if it has already been requested, but data has not yet been received. Not sure if I understand how to fix gaps with this - would you mind giving me an example?

In general the blocker for post-advertisement insertion of prefetch tags is that clients may not refresh the playlist in time to know that the segment has a new tag. I can see adding tags post-advertisement in the case that there are multiple prefetches and the tag is on N+1 or greater - the client should refresh the manifest before the encoder beings sending segments. But I think there will be some tricky race conditions with this kind of solution.

Reviewer 6: Yes, adding a tag after the fact will always be racy. In the end, players will have to cope with the fact that there may end up being gaps and discontinuities in or between prefetch segments. Trying to fit EXT-X-GAP into prefetch segments is probably not worth it.

Reviewer 7: @biglittlebigben in the case of a camera flip, how do you handle this now if it occurs in the middle of a segment?

I think that'll shed light onto how this particular case would interact.

Reviewer 6: We currently detect the gap in timestamps in the backend. If it is over a threshold, we start a new segment and insert a discontinuity. This does mean that players watching over LHLS will not hear about the discontinuity in time from the playlist. Our player has heuristics to detect such gaps.

Reviewer 7: So, I don't believe this makes much of a change to that workflow.

The prefetch segment up until the point the packager detects the gap in the backend would continue to push data normally like a prefetch. Upon detecting the gap, it would complete the segment, close the connection.

Updates the manifest locally with that completed segment, advertising the length now with a EXT-INF, push that manifest to the origin with the next prefetch having the DISCO applied to it.

Thoughts?

Reviewer 6: That's what we would do indeed. Is this allowed by the spec though? (inserting a discontinuity for a segment that didn't have a prefetch discontinuity?)

Author: @biglittlebigben Yes, and I believe it should also be mandatory

Reviewer 6: That would work for our use case then. Any feedback from player developers about having to detect and handle timestamp discontinuities?

### EXT-X-MAP

Prefetch segments must not be advertised with an `EXT-X-MAP` tag.

### EXT-X-KEY

Prefetch segments may be advertised with an `EXT-X-KEY` tag. The key itself must be complete; the server must not expect the client to progressively stream keys.

## Client/Server Responsibilities

This section amends any language in RFC8216 which would preclude streaming a prefetch segment. The term "Media Segment" also applies to a prefetch segment. As always, unless otherwise countermanded all other requirements apply. 

## General Server Responsibilities

Any Media Segment that is specified in a Playlist loaded by a client MUST be available for immediate download unless it has been marked with an EXT-X-PREFETCH or EXT-X-GAP tag; otherwise, playback errors can occur. Once download starts, only prefetch segments may have their transfer rate constrained by the segment production process.

In addition to the outlined cases, the server must not change the Media Playlist file except to:

* Transform a prefetch segment to a complete segment. ([Prefetch Transformation](#prefetch-transformation))

> To each prefetch segment response, the server must append the `Transfer-Encoding: chunked` header. The server must maintain the persistent HTTP connection long enough for a client to receive the entire segment - this must be no less than the time from when the segment was first advertised to the time it takes to complete.

Reviewer 2: This limits communication to HTTP/1.1, because HTTP/2 does not support this mechanism (as described in [RFC7540, Section 8.1](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7540#section-8.1)).
Furthermore, Chunker Transfer Encoding requires that we follow a specific protocol (described in [RFC7230, Section 4.1](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7230#section-4.1)) which is not referred to here.

I recommend making a distinction between HTTP versions and referring to the specs that describe streaming (chunked) data transfer.

Author: 👍 Good idea, I've gotten similar feedback

For guidance on the Discontinuities, please see [Sequence Numbers](#sequence-numbers) and [Discontinuities](#ext-x-discontinuity).

## General Client Responsibilities

> The client may opt into an LHLS stream. If so, the client must choose a prefetch Media Segment to play first from the Media Playlist when playback starts. The client must choose prefetch Media Segments for playback in the order in which they appear in the Playlist; however, the client may open connections to as many prefetch segments as desired. If data from a newer prefetch Media Segment is received before an older one, the client should not append this data to the SourceBuffer; doing so may stall playback. If the client opts out of LHLS, it must ignore all prefetch Media Segments, and any additional constraints outlined in this specification.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The client may opt into an LHLS stream. If so, the client must choose a prefetch Media Segment to play first from the Media Playlist when playback starts. The client must choose prefetch Media Segments for playback in the order in which they appear in the Playlist; however, the client may open connections to as many prefetch segments as desired. If data from a newer prefetch Media Segment is received before an older segment is completely received, the client should hold on to this data until transfer of the previous segment completes. If the client opts out of LHLS, it must ignore all prefetch Media Segments, and any additional constraints outlined in this specification.
```

> The client may set a minimum amount of buffer to begin and maintain playback. The client should not impose a minimum buffered amount greater than one target duration; doing so may introduce undue latency.

Reviewer 3: This feels like somewhere we might want to provide a little more guidance, smart defaults, or open the door to configure the target min buffer somehow. With ultra low latency there will be a fine balance between lower latency and more rebuffering, that will likely be audience dependent. A lot of players don't give you any buffer config options today.

Author: Yeah I need to rework this section. It was trying to be an analogue of [this section ](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8216#section-6.3.3 )in the HLS spec but it didn't really come out right. 

> This feels like somewhere we might want to provide a little more guidance, smart defaults, or open the door to configure the target min buffer somehow.

We're trying to be as hands-off as possible with recommendations - clients should be able to build whatever experience best suits their usecase. Maybe we can strike a balance with language (*should* instead of *must*), but it may be more productive to put any kind of guidance in some ancillary doc where we don't have to worry about spec compliance. Hls.js will be a reference implementation, too.

Author: >clients should be able to build whatever experience best suits their usecase. 

Just to clarify this, they should build whatever *low-latency* usecase best suits them. The original intent behind this section was to ensure that they were operating like a low-latency player (and not just ignoring prefetch segments or having like 30s of buffer or whatever) but I don't think it came out right. I'll take another stab at it.

Reviewer 3: @nicoweilelemental's other comment about providing the target latency in the manifest would actually solve my concerns here. I like that idea a lot. Assuming a player respects that tag, it wouldn't have to expose much else.

Reviewer 8: +1 to target latency in the manifest.  There definitely needs to be a knob to turn for different use cases as they walk the line between latency and rebuffering

Reviewer 9: I'd actually argue that the manifest should not dictate the playback latency. This may seem contrary to the discussion, but here are my reasons why:

1. Latency is a system feature, not dictated (or controlled) solely by the encoder. The appropriate latency should be a commercial target tempered by the characteristics of the client device, the last mile connectivity and the CDN. A mobile client on a 3G connection and an older mobile phone cannot sustain the same low latency as a fiber-connected SmartTV. They may be fed by different CDNs, yet all clients will receive the same playlist.
2. Architecturally the role of the playlist is to to describe the availability of media data. For service robustness and interoperability, this role should be cleanly encapsulated. It should not be overloaded to also carry application-level instructions such as which latency to play that content with, what screen size to show it on, whether to disallow skip during ads, which caption language to chose etc. Some clients should legitimately play the content 30s behind live, others 2s - it depends upon their use-case. All these service level decisions need to be carried out of band. When a client has to play media, it should be given a playlist (which describes the content availability) and some type of config/init file (which describes _how_ to play it). 

I think the manifest should add information to allow the latency to be estimated and I would support the spec saying that the package MUST add  #EXT-X-PROGRAM-DATE-TIME to the media playlists. What the various players to with this information is up to the service operator. 

Cheers
Will

Reviewer 5: > I'd actually argue that the manifest should not dictate the playback latency. This may seem contrary to the discussion, but here are my reasons why:
> 
> 1. Latency is a system feature, not dictated (or controlled) solely by the encoder. The appropriate latency should be a commercial target tempered by the characteristics of the client device, the last mile connectivity and the CDN. A mobile client on a 3G connection and an older mobile phone cannot sustain the same low latency as a fiber-connected SmartTV. They may be fed by different CDNs, yet all clients will receive the same playlist.

I agree with you that the latency depends on a lot of factors. One of the key feature streaming service providers would want is that live playout to be synchronous across multiple clients in order to provide a common live experience for everybody, irrespective of their connection speed, device capabilites etc., It might be easier to solve this problem from the specification than everybody coming up with their own solutions.
Also a streaming service providers might want to have different latencies for different live events based on their use-case, contract obligations etc., Even in such cases it might be easier to control such things from encoder itself.

> 2. Architecturally the role of the playlist is to to describe the availability of media data. For service robustness and interoperability, this role should be cleanly encapsulated. It should not be overloaded to also carry application-level instructions such as which latency to play that content with, what screen size to show it on, whether to disallow skip during ads, which caption language to chose etc. Some clients should legitimately play the content 30s behind live, others 2s - it depends upon their use-case. All these service level decisions need to be carried out of band. When a client has to play media, it should be given a playlist (which describes the content availability) and some type of config/init file (which describes _how_ to play it).

The issue with an out-of-band config file for "how_to_play_it" is that everybody will come up with their own solutions which will lead to fragmentation within the industry. 
Even it is not mandatory/strict parameter, an optional parameter like "suggestedPresentationDelay" in DASH would be helpful for LHLS as well. 

> 
> I think the manifest should add information to allow the latency to be estimated and I would support the spec saying that the package MUST add #EXT-X-PROGRAM-DATE-TIME to the media playlists. What the various players to with this information is up to the service operator.

Yes, I agree. In any-case it is better if we make #EXT-X-PROGRAM-DATE-TIME mandatory for LHLS.

> 
> Cheers
> Will

Author: I agree with Will and his summary. The client will play the LHLS stream as best as it can given the current conditions and configuration. The problem with a target is that it's not actionable - if the client is behind because the network is slow, there's nothing it can do to get ahead. I was checking to see if DASH had something similar but couldn't find anything (but I didn't have the chance to look very hard). 

>But even then, manifest updates and network delays can cause us to stall if we try to play at the live edge. So we will actually delay where we will play at so we don't stall. The time we adjust by can be specified in the manifest using the MPD@suggestedPresentationDelay attribute. This specifies the delay to give the live stream to allow for smooth playback. If it isn't specified, we will give a reasonable default value.

`suggestedPresentationDelay` looks interesting (it seems to specify a _minimum_ latency), but I'm not sure how useful it is for LHLS. The encoder _must_ update the manifest with new segments on an interval equal to the average length of a segment.

>I think the manifest should add information to allow the latency to be estimated and I would support the spec saying that the package MUST add #EXT-X-PROGRAM-DATE-TIME to the media playlists.

I had #EXT-X-PROGRAM-DATE-TIME this in an original draft just for this purpose, but deleted it - i couldn't come up with an acceptable definition that all encoders could follow. Is the timestamp the time when the segment begins transcoding, has finished; or is it something like when the manifest was created in-memory (or between whatever stages in a transcoding pipeline). Maybe it doesn't matter too much. Input appreciated here, I'd like to add it back.

Reviewer 9: There are indeed many potential reference points for where to hang the definition of #EXT-X-PROGRAM-DATE-TIME. MPEG has defined 6 if I remember correctly for the equivalent in DASH. There is no need for that complexity here. All you need is a COMMON reference point that all clients can access. They can then achieve synchronization (per @jkarthic-akamai comment above) by targeting a fixed delta from that point. A practical point would be the wallclock time at which that frame of media _entered_ the encoder. Assuming very small camera delay, the delta between that value and the wallclock time when the media frame is displayed by the client then represents the end-to-end latency. That's for lab confirmation. In the real production world, there is an unknown production delay upstream of the encoder (camera, OB truck, satellite contribution, broadcast profanity delay etc) so its very difficult for the end client to calculate the true e2e latency. Luckily, we don;t need to know the true e2e latency even for synch, we just need a consistent reference point between clients.

Reviewer 3: I can get behind the philosophy of the manifest just reporting the availability. But defining the target latency somewhere is critical in these use cases, so it brings me back to the original comment of needing more in the spec to get clients to expose configuration. i.e. if iOS Safari implements LHLS with a set latency target and no option to configure it, that's not good.

> A practical point would be the wallclock time at which that frame of media entered the encoder.

I'm not sure the other options but that seems the most sensible. However with a UGC platform, streamers can use anything that streams RTMP (e.g. OBS) to the central service, and in that case I don't believe the central service has access to when the media frame entered the original encoder. For this use case I think I'd be fine with just using the time the central service received the media frame in the stream. It ignores the time prior to that, but assuming I can configure all my players' target latencies, I can adjust for that.

Reviewer 5: > 
> I had #EXT-X-PROGRAM-DATE-TIME this in an original draft just for this purpose, but deleted it - i couldn't come up with an acceptable definition that all encoders could follow. Is the timestamp the time when the segment begins transcoding, has finished; or is it something like when the manifest was created in-memory (or between whatever stages in a transcoding pipeline). Maybe it doesn't matter too much. Input appreciated here, I'd like to add it back.

I agree that there is no need for us to define #EXT-X-PROGRAM-DATE-TIME strictly. We could just stick with the original definition from the official HLS spec. https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-pantos-http-live-streaming-23#page-17 . We just suggest to make it as mandatory(MUST) parameter, so that all clients have a common reference point to sync.

Reviewer 6: FWIW, we are relying on #EXT-X-PROGRAM-DATE-TIME to decide on what segment to start playback to reach our target latency. This approach has been successful for us.

## Prefetch Transformation
[prefetch-transformation]: #prefetch-transformation

> After the server has made a prefetch segment available for direct playback, that segment must be transformed to a complete segment. The following transform constraints must be observed:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After the server has made a prefetch segment available for direct playback, that segment must be transformed into a complete segment. The following transform constraints must be observed:
```

- The server must not insert any segment between oldest completed segment and the newest prefetch segment.
- The server must advertise the transformed segment with the same URI used in the prefetch advertisement.

> - The server must append the `EXTINF` metadata tag to the transformed segment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The server must append the `EXTINF` metadata tag before the transformed segment.
```

- If the prefetch segment was advertised with a metadata tag, the transformed segment must be advertised with an identical or equivalent metadata tag. For example:
    - `EXT-X-PREFETCH-DISCONTINUITY` must be transformed to `EXT-X-DISCONTINUITY`

> - When a prefetch segment is transformed to a complete segment, the server must not increment the `EXT-X-MEDIA-SEQUENCE` value. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- When a prefetch segment is transformed into a complete segment, the server must not increment the `EXT-X-MEDIA-SEQUENCE` value. 
```

> - When a prefetch discontinuity is transformed to complete discontinuity, the server must not increment the `EXT-X-DISCONTINUITY-SEQUENCE` value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- When a prefetch discontinuity is transformed into complete discontinuity, the server must not increment the `EXT-X-DISCONTINUITY-SEQUENCE` value.
```

The server may advertise zero or more complete segments.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

- This feature will require significant codebase changes to Hls.js, and may introduce regressions.
- The proposed changes may make the codebase more complicated. Hls.js has an event-based architecture, in which events follow a sequential pattern (e.g. LOADING -> LOADED -> PARSED -> BUFFERED). LHLS will require events to be fired out of regular order (e.g. LOADING -> LOADING -> LOADED -> LOADING -> PARSED -> LOADED). A poor implementation may make codebase maintenance more difficult.

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

This section details the *why* of some of our design choices, and the information used to arrive at that conclusion. Often the choice of X over Y can be traced back to one or more of the guiding principles of this proposal.

## HTTP vs WebRTC

> HTTP has been chosen as the preferred protocol because of it's scalability and ease of implementation. While WebRTC is faster, HTTP performance is good enough to achieve our goal of ~2s latency. The section below outlines the common arguments for and against each. Please note that our initial choice does not preclude the possibility of supporting WebRTC in the future. Much of the LHLS code which will be built into Hls.js is protocol-agnostic and will be reusable if and when WebRTC is built.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
HTTP has been chosen as the preferred protocol because of its scalability and ease of implementation. While WebRTC is faster, HTTP performance is good enough to achieve our goal of ~2s latency. The section below outlines the common arguments for and against each. Please note that our initial choice does not preclude the possibility of supporting WebRTC in the future. Much of the LHLS code which will be built into Hls.js is protocol-agnostic and will be reusable if and when WebRTC is built.
```

> WebSockets are not under consideration as two-way communication has no current use, and provides no performance benefit over HTTP or WebRTC. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
WebSockets are not under consideration as two-way communication has no current use and provides no performance benefit over HTTP or WebRTC. 
```

#### HTTP

HTTP low-latency streaming allows developers to leverage existing HTTP video delivery infrastructure. The most notable benefit is that HTTP streams can be edge cached, allowing a live event to efficiently scale to large audiences. HTTP is also more straightforward to implement in Hls.js. We already have well-functioning code for handling HTTP requests, and domain knowledge which will help us implement LHLS. More developers server streams via HTTP instead of WebRTC and lends accessibility and adoption to our proposal.

> HTTP uses TCP, and TCP has inherent latency which is makes it less well suited for streaming data compared to WebRTC. TCP has mechanisms such as flow control, retransmission, and error-free data transfer which are useful for serving sites but are often unnecessary for delivering video. These transfer mechanism each have a latency associated with them which repeats for each request. LHLS mitigates some of this latency of TCP by initiating the prefetch request before the segment is ready.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
HTTP uses TCP, and TCP has inherent latency which makes it less suitable for streaming data compared to WebRTC. TCP has mechanisms such as flow control, retransmission, and error-free data transfer which are useful for serving sites but are often unnecessary for delivering video. These transfer mechanism each have a latency associated with them which repeats for each request. LHLS mitigates some of this latency of TCP by initiating the prefetch request before the segment is ready.
```

#### WebRTC

> WebRTC relies on UDP for data delivery. UDP achieves significantly lower latency than TCP because it is lossy - it does not spend time guaranteeing the transmission of data. Lost data in a media stream is usually not fatal and results in dropped frames. WebRTC has been shown to achieve sub-second streaming latency.

Reviewer 2: WebRTC can also use TCP if desired.
If UDP versus TCP is discussed, it might be worth mentioning QUIC as well.

> WebRTC suffers from scalability. Each "peer", in this case the client, requires a direct connection to another peer. Streaming servers are able to act as peers but must serve each request with a unique connection. This requirement precludes edge caching. A fitting analogy is that WebRTC streams require a unique URL for every client. WebRTC does have the advantage that peers may also be clients but this requires additional code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
WebRTC does not scale as easily as HTTP. Each "peer", in this case the client, requires a direct connection to another peer. Streaming servers are able to act as peers but must serve each request with a unique connection. This requirement precludes edge caching. A fitting analogy is that WebRTC streams require a unique URL for every client. WebRTC does have the advantage that peers may also be clients but this requires additional code.
```

WebRTC also is less accessible than HTTP. Most developers today do not stream via WebRTC, and may not have the knowledge or resources to do so. Client support for WebRTC is available but more limited than existing HTTP clients. SSAI solutions are possible but also require further changes, and the breadth of support is not clear.

## Method of Advertising LHLS Segments

> #### In-Playlist Signaling

Reviewer 2: Indentation in this section seems to be missing a level (2 -> 4)

In-playlist signaling happens when prefetch segments are advertised within the same playlist as complete segments. Prefetch segments are included at the bottom and are differentiated via the `EXT-X-PREFETCH` tag. This is the scheme outlined in this proposal. 

> We chose this scheme because it is backwards compatible with clients which have not implemented this proposal. According to the HLS specification clients must ignore any tags not outlined within; since `EXT-X-PREFETCH` is not an official tag clients will be left with a standard HLS playlist. This allows a server to deliver a single manifest which plays in both LHLS and unsupported clients. This scheme also allows clients to disable or enable LHLS while the client is streaming. Developers may make this option available to the user so that they are able to choose an experience most beneficial to them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We chose this scheme because it is backwards compatible with clients which have not implemented this proposal. According to the HLS specification, clients must ignore any tags not outlined within; since `EXT-X-PREFETCH` is not an official tag, clients will be left with a standard HLS playlist. This allows a server to deliver a single manifest which plays in both LHLS clients and HLS clients. This scheme also allows clients to disable or enable LHLS while the client is streaming. Developers may make this option available to the user so that they are able to choose the experience that is most beneficial to them.
```

> Another benefit of this scheme is that it more easily takes advantage of the HLS specification. In most cases an in-playlist prefetch segments can be treated like a complete segments, which promotes code reuse and eases implementation. As an example a prefetch segment's Media Sequence Number is calculated relative to the complete segments in the playlist; if prefetch segments were elsewhere a new solution would have to be devised.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Another benefit of this scheme is that it more easily takes advantage of the HLS specification. In most cases, an in-playlist prefetch segment can be treated like a complete segment, which promotes code reuse and eases implementation. As an example, a prefetch segment's Media Sequence Number is calculated relative to the complete segments in the playlist; if prefetch segments were not located after all complete segments, a new solution would have to be devised.
```

#### All-Playlist Signaling

> All-Playlist signaling is when every Media Playlist contains only prefetch segments. In this scheme the `EXT-X-PREFETCH` tag is not required; all segments are assumed to be prefetch. This solution has the benefit of requiring little or no modifications from the HLS specification (what changes, if any, are hard to determine without actually making such a proposal). But this solution is not backwards compatible with clients not supporting this proposal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All-Playlist signaling is a strategy in which every Media Playlist contains only prefetch segments. In this scheme, the `EXT-X-PREFETCH` tag is not required; all segments are assumed to be prefetch. This solution has the benefit of requiring little or no modifications from the HLS specification (what changes, if any, are hard to determine without actually making such a proposal). But this solution is not backwards compatible with clients not supporting this proposal.
```
It would be worth to mention the exact compatibility issue:
> Any Media Segment that is specified in a Playlist loaded by a client
> MUST be available for immediate download unless it has been marked
> with an EXT-X-GAP tag; otherwise playback errors can occur.  Once
> download starts, its transfer rate SHOULD NOT be constrained by the
> segment production process.

(Section 6.2.1 of the [Pantos RFC](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-pantos-hls-rfc8216bis-03))

#### Separate-Playlist Signaling

> Separate-Playlist signaling is when a Master Playlist advertises an entire rendition as prefetch. Like all-playlist signaling, this scheme benefits from requiring little or no changes to the HLS specification on Media Playlists; it also has the added benefit of building backwards compatibility (contingent on an implementation which causes non-participating clients to ignore the rendition). This scheme, however, is more complex to implement in Hls.js. Hls.js works within the context of a single playlist - meaning that it chooses segments and gathers information from only one rendition. Supporting a second concurrent Media Playlist would most likely require significant amounts of new code as well as code refactored. Both servers and clients would also need to build a mechanism to synchronize properties such as Media Sequence Number and Discontinuity Sequence Numbers across complete and prefetch renditions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Separate-Playlist signaling is a strategy in which a Master Playlist advertises an entire rendition as prefetch. Like all-playlist signaling, this scheme benefits from requiring little or no changes to the HLS specification of Media Playlists; it also has the added benefit of building backwards compatibility (contingent on an implementation which causes non-participating clients to ignore the rendition). This scheme, however, is more complex to implement in Hls.js. Hls.js works within the context of a single playlist - meaning that it chooses segments and gathers information from only one rendition. Supporting a second concurrent Media Playlist would most likely require significant amounts of new code as well as code refactored. Both servers and clients would also need to build a mechanism to synchronize properties such as Media Sequence Number and Discontinuity Sequence Numbers across complete and prefetch renditions.
```
I think the main downside of this approach is that it complicates managing renditions on both the client side and server side. For example, logic is required to handle the case where you only have a non-prefetch version of one of the renditions (Is it ignored?).

Author: That's a good question. The client would just drop to regular latency mode in that case, but I don't see why an encoder would choose not to encode all of them as LHLS.

- SSAI Support
    - SCTE-35
- Exclusive support for CMAF (aka forbidding MPEG-TS)
- Should the manifest only update after the prefetch frags have completed? Can prefetch frags be repeated if they are not yet completed?
- Should playback rate and rebuffer handling be unified in this spec, or should it be up to the client implement as they see fit?
 - At what interval should the client reload an LHLS playlist in order to minimize latency caused
 
## What parts of the design do you expect to resolve through the implementation of this feature before stabilization?

Aside from `DISCONTINUITY`, It is not certain which tags need a prefetch prefix to ensure backwards compatibility with players that do not support this proposal. For example, we do not know how Safari's native player will handle a rogue `EXT-X-PROGRAM-DATE-TIME` tag. When test manifest are acquired, implementers must ensure that no unexpected behavior is introduced. 

## What related issues do you consider out of scope for this RFC that could be addressed in the future independently of the solution that comes out of this RFC?

- Alternative connection protocols (WebRTC, Websockets, etc.)

> - Manifestless mode

Reviewer 2: It might be worth linking to a resource that describes this concept.

Author: Yeah we can link out to some DASH docs for now, there isn't anything specified for HLS atm

#EXT-X-PROGRAM-DATE-TIME:2018-09-05T20:59:08.531Z
#EXTINF:2.000
https://foo.com/bar/1.ts
#EXT-X-PROGRAM-DATE-TIME:2018-09-05T20:59:10.531Z
#EXTINF:2.000
https://foo.com/bar/2.ts

#EXT-X-PREFETCH:https://foo.com/bar/3.ts
#EXT-X-PREFETCH:https://foo.com/bar/4.ts
```

Discontinuities:

```
#EXTM3U
#EXT-X-VERSION:3
#EXT-X-TARGETDURATION:2
#EXT-X-MEDIA-SEQUENCE: 0
#EXT-X-DISCONTINUITY-SEQUENCE: 0
#EXT-X-PROGRAM-DATE-TIME:2018-09-05T20:59:06.531Z
#EXTINF:2.000
https://foo.com/bar/0.ts
#EXT-X-PROGRAM-DATE-TIME:2018-09-05T20:59:08.531Z
#EXTINF:2.000
https://foo.com/bar/1.ts

#EXT-X-PREFETCH-DISCONTINUITY
#EXT-X-PREFETCH:https://foo.com/bar/5.ts
#EXT-X-PREFETCH:https://foo.com/bar/6.ts
```

In this case `5.ts` and `6.ts` have a Discontinuity Sequence Number of 1. On refresh:

```
#EXTM3U
#EXT-X-VERSION:3
#EXT-X-TARGETDURATION:2
#EXT-X-MEDIA-SEQUENCE: 1
#EXT-X-DISCONTINUITY-SEQUENCE: 0
#EXT-X-PROGRAM-DATE-TIME:2018-09-05T20:59:08.531Z
#EXTINF:2.000
https://foo.com/bar/1.ts
#EXT-X-DISCONTINUITY
#EXT-X-PROGRAM-DATE-TIME:2018-09-05T21:59:10.531Z
#EXTINF:2.000
https://foo.com/bar/5.ts

#EXT-X-PREFETCH:https://foo.com/bar/6.ts
#EXT-X-PREFETCH:https://foo.com/bar/7.ts
```

> `5.ts, 6.ts, and 7.ts` all have the Discontinuity Sequence Number of 1. Note how the `PREFETCH-DISCONTINUITY` transformed to the conventional `EXT-X-DISCONTINUITY` tag, and how that tag still applies to prefetch segments.

Reviewer 2: A new `#EXT-X-PROGRAM-DATE-TIME` tag was also introduced. I cannot find this behavior described in earlier sections.

Author: It was in an old draft, I'll add it back
